packages/md-app/src/components/editor/plugins/markdown/fixtures/common-md-blockquotes.md, before:

# Blockquotes

<!--
TEST REASONING:
The serialized blockquotes show significant restructuring:
1. Continuation markers (> at beginning of each line) are removed in multi-line blockquotes
2. Nested blockquotes are flattened with their content combined
3. Multiple paragraphs within blockquotes are similarly flattened
4. Complex content like headings and lists are preserved but without internal formatting

While these transformations alter the visual structure, the content remains
in blockquotes, preserving the essential semantic meaning. This is a compromise
between perfect fidelity and practical serialization.
-->

## tc - simple blockquote.

> This is a simple blockquote.

## tc - multi line blockquote.

> This blockquote
spans multiple lines
in the source Markdown.

## tc - blockquote - inline formatting

> This blockquote contains **formatted** text with _emphasis_ and `code`.

## tc - blockquote - with link

> This blockquote contains a [link](https://example.com).

## tc - blockquote - nested

> Nested blockquotes:
> > This is a nested blockquote.
> > > This is a deeply nested blockquote.

## tc - blockquote - multiple paragraphs

> Blockquote with multiple paragraphs:  
> This is the second paragraph in the blockquote.  
> This is the third paragraph in **the** blockquote.  
> This is the fourth paragraph in the blockquote.  

## tc - blockquote - containing markdown

> Blockquote with other elements:
>
> ## tc - Heading in a blockquote
>
> - List item in blockquote
> - Another list item
>
> ```
> Code block in blockquote
> ```

## tc - blockquote - followed by text

> Blockquote followed by text.

Regular paragraph after a blockquote.

## tc - blockquote - character inline - not detef

Text with > character that is not a blockquote.

Paragraph with a line break and then a blockquote:

> This blockquote comes after a line break in a paragraph.

Commit message:

fixes break handling - continue tests cleanup

packages/md-app/src/components/editor/plugins/markdown/fixtures/common-md-blockquotes.md, after:



# Blockquotes

## tc - simple blockquote.

> This is a simple blockquote.

## tc - multi line blockquote.

> This blockquote
spans multiple lines
in the source Markdown.

## tc - blockquote - inline formatting

> This blockquote contains **formatted** text with _emphasis_ and `code`.

## tc - blockquote - with link

> This blockquote contains a [link](https://example.com).

## tc - blockquote - nested

> Nested blockquotes:
> > This is a nested blockquote.
> > > This is a deeply nested blockquote.

## tc - blockquote - multiple spread over multiple rows

> This block qoute is just spread over multiple rows
> one very long paragraph
> written in 3 rows

## tc - blockquote - multiple lines - two leading spaces one break

> Blockquote with multiple lines:  
> This is the second line in the blockquote.  
> This is the third line in **the** blockquote.  
> This is the fourth line in the blockquote.  

## tc - blockquote - multiple lines - using the break tag

> Blockquote with multiple lines:<br>
> This is the second line in the blockquote.<br>This is the third line in **the** blockquote.  
> This is the fourth line in the blockquote.  

## tc - blockquote - multiple paragraphs - two line breaks

> Blockquote with multiple paragraphs:
>
> This is the second paragraph in the blockquote.
>
> This is the third paragraph in **the** blockquote.
>
> This is the fourth paragraph in the blockquote.  

## tc - blockquote - containing markdown

> Blockquote with other elements:
>
> ## tc - Heading in a blockquote
>
> - List item in blockquote
> - Another list item
>
> ```
> Code block in blockquote
> ```

## tc - blockquote - followed by text

> Blockquote followed by text.

Regular paragraph after a blockquote.

## tc - blockquote - character inline - not detef

Text with > character that is not a blockquote.

Paragraph with a line break and then a blockquote:

> This blockquote comes after a line break in a paragraph.
