packages/lix/docs/docs/guide/getting-started.mdx, before:

import CodeSnippet from "../components/code-snippet";
import * as example from "../examples/getting-started.ts";
import exampleSrcCode from "../examples/getting-started.ts?raw";
import { PackageManagerTabs } from "@theme";

# Getting Started

Lix is a JavaScript SDK for change control that enables Git-like capabilities for apps and agents: [Change proposals](/guide/change-proposals.md), [versioning](/guide/versions.md) (branching), [history](/guide/history.md), [blame](/guide/attribution.md), and more.

- 🌐 Works in browsers and Node.js environments
- 🔌 Works with any data format (Excel, JSON, CSV, etc.)
- 🤖 Made for _Human to Human_ and _Human to AI agent_ collaboration

![Lix features](/lix-features.svg)

## Installation

Install the Lix SDK package:

<PackageManagerTabs command="install @lix-js/sdk @lix-js/plugin-json" />

## Opening a Lix

Open a lix with `openLix()` and provide plugins for the file types you are going to use.

<CodeSnippet
  module={example}
  srcCode={exampleSrcCode}
  sections={["opening-lix"]}
/>

Key points:

- The `jsonPlugin` enables Lix to understand JSON file changes at a granular level (e.g., detecting which specific properties changed)
- Without plugins, Lix would only see files as binary blobs

## Insert a File

Inserting a file is the first step to start controlling changes with Lix. When you insert a file:

1. **Lix controls the changes in the file** - From this point forward, every change of the file is tracked and versioned
2. **Any file type is supported** - While this example uses JSON, Lix can handle any file format (CSV, Excel, images, etc.). See a list of available plugins in the [Plugins](/plugins) section.

<CodeSnippet
  module={example}
  srcCode={exampleSrcCode}
  sections={["inserting-file"]}
/>

Key points:

- Files are stored as `Uint8Array` (binary data), making Lix format-agnostic
- The `path` acts as the unique identifier for the file
- Once inserted, the file becomes part of Lix's change control system

## Updating Files

Once a file is under Lix's change control, updates work just like regular database operations. No special commands or workflows - just update the data and Lix handles the rest.

<CodeSnippet
  module={example}
  srcCode={exampleSrcCode}
  sections={["updating-file"]}
/>

Key points:

- The JSON plugin identifies exactly what changed (the `age` property from 50 to 51)
- History preservation - The previous state remains accessible while the current state is updated
- No manual commits needed - Unlike Git, changes are captured instantly without explicit commits

## File History

With files under change control, you can query their complete history using standard SQL. Every change is preserved and accessible.

<CodeSnippet
  module={example}
  srcCode={exampleSrcCode}
  sections={["querying-file-history"]}
/>

Key points:

- `file_history` provides access to all previous states of a file
- Changes are ordered by depth: 0 is the current state, higher numbers are older
- Each row contains the complete file content at that point in time
- Standard SQL queries work - filter, join, and analyze history however you need

## Further Reading

To learn more about Lix and its capabilities, check out:

- [Core Concepts](./concepts/files) - Learn about the fundamental concepts
- [Switching between versions](./versions) - Work with multiple versions like branches
- [API Reference](/api/) - Explore the complete API documentation
- [Examples](/examples/) - See practical usage examples

Commit message:

refactor: update documentation and code to use lixcol_root_commit_id instead of lixcol_root_change_set_id

packages/lix/docs/docs/guide/getting-started.mdx, after:

import CodeSnippet from "../components/code-snippet";
import * as example from "../examples/getting-started.ts";
import exampleSrcCode from "../examples/getting-started.ts?raw";
import { PackageManagerTabs } from "@theme";

# Getting Started

Lix is a JavaScript SDK for change control that enables Git-like capabilities for apps and agents: [Change proposals](/guide/change-proposals.md), [versioning](/guide/versions.md) (branching), [history](/guide/history.md), [blame](/guide/attribution.md), and more.

- 🌐 Works in browsers and Node.js environments
- 🔌 Works with any data format (Excel, JSON, CSV, etc.)
- 🤖 Made for _Human to Human_ and _Human to AI agent_ collaboration

![Lix features](/lix-features.svg)

## Installation

Install the Lix SDK package:

<PackageManagerTabs command="install @lix-js/sdk @lix-js/plugin-json" />

## Opening a Lix

Open a lix with `openLix()` and provide plugins for the file types you are going to use.

<CodeSnippet
  module={example}
  srcCode={exampleSrcCode}
  sections={["opening-lix"]}
/>

Key points:

- The `jsonPlugin` enables Lix to understand JSON file changes at a granular level (e.g., detecting which specific properties changed)
- Without plugins, Lix would only see files as binary blobs

## Insert a File

Inserting a file is the first step to start controlling changes with Lix. When you insert a file:

1. **Lix controls the changes in the file** - From this point forward, every change of the file is tracked and versioned
2. **Any file type is supported** - While this example uses JSON, Lix can handle any file format (CSV, Excel, images, etc.). See a list of available plugins in the [Plugins](/plugins) section.

<CodeSnippet
  module={example}
  srcCode={exampleSrcCode}
  sections={["inserting-file"]}
/>

Key points:

- Files are stored as `Uint8Array` (binary data), making Lix format-agnostic
- The `path` acts as the unique identifier for the file
- Once inserted, the file becomes part of Lix's change control system

## Updating Files

Once a file is under Lix's change control, updates work just like regular database operations. No special commands or workflows - just update the data and Lix handles the rest.

<CodeSnippet
  module={example}
  srcCode={exampleSrcCode}
  sections={["updating-file"]}
/>

Key points:

- The JSON plugin identifies exactly what changed (the `age` property from 50 to 51)
- History preservation - The previous state remains accessible while the current state is updated
- No manual commits needed - Unlike Git, changes are captured instantly without explicit commits

## File History

With files under change control, you can query their complete history using standard SQL. Every change is preserved and accessible.

<CodeSnippet
  module={example}
  srcCode={exampleSrcCode}
  sections={["querying-file-history"]}
/>

Key points:

- `file_history` provides access to all previous states of a file
- Filter by `lixcol_root_commit_id` (and typically `lixcol_depth = 0`) to scope history
  to a single checkpoint and avoid mixing multiple timelines
- Changes are ordered by depth: 0 is the current state, higher numbers are older
- Each row contains the complete file content at that point in time
- Standard SQL queries work - filter, join, and analyze history however you need

## Further Reading

To learn more about Lix and its capabilities, check out:

- [Core Concepts](./concepts/files) - Learn about the fundamental concepts
- [Switching between versions](./versions) - Work with multiple versions like branches
- [API Reference](/api/) - Explore the complete API documentation
- [Examples](/examples/) - See practical usage examples
